X
X (eks).

Defn: X, the twenty-fourth letter of the English alphabet, has three
sounds; a compound nonvocal sound (that of ks), as in wax; a compound
vocal sound (that of gz), as in example; and, at the beginning of a
word, a simple vocal sound (that of z), as in xanthic.  See Guide to
Pronunciation, §§ 217, 270, 271.

The form and value of X are from the Latin X, which is from the Greek
X, which in some Greek alphabets had the value of ks, though in the
one now in common use it represents an aspirated sound of k.


XANTHAMIDE
Xanth*am"ide, n. [Xanthic + amide.] (Chem.)

Defn: An amido derivative of xanthic acid obtained as a white
crystalline substance, C2H5O.CS.NH2; -- called also xanthogen amide.


XANTHATE
Xan"thate, n. [See Xanthic.] (Chem.)

Defn: A salt of xanthic; a xanthogenate.


XANTHELASMA
Xan`the*las"ma, n. [NL.; Gr. xanqo`s yellow + 'e`lasma a metal
plate.] (Med.)

Defn: See Xanthoma.


XANTHIAN
Xan"thi*an, a.

Defn: Of or pertaining to Xanthus, an ancient town on Asia Minor; --
applied especially to certain marbles found near that place, and now
in the British Museum.


XANTHIC
Xan"thic, a. [Gr. xanqo`s yellow: cf. F. xanthique.]

1. Tending toward a yellow color, or to one of those colors, green
being excepted, in which yellow is a constituent, as scarlet, orange,
etc.

2. (Chem.)
 (a) Possessing, imparting, or producing a yellow color; as, xanthic
acid.
 (b) Of or pertaining to xanthic acid, or its compounds; xanthogenic.
 (c) Of or pertaining to xanthin.

Xanthic acid (Chem.), a heavy, astringent, colorless oil,
C2H5O.CS.SH, having a pungent odor. It is produced by leading carbon
disulphide into a hot alcoholic solution of potassium hydroxide. So
called from the yellow color of many of its salts. Called also
xanthogenic acid. -- Xanthic colors (Bot.), those colors (of flowers)
having some tinge of yellow; -- opposed to cyanic colors.  See under
Cyanic.


XANTHIDE
Xan"thide, n. [See Xantho-.] (Chem.)

Defn: A compound or derivative of xanthogen. [Archaic]


XANTHIDIUM
Xan*thid"i*um, n.; pl. Xanthidia (#). [NL., fr. Gr. xanqo`s yellow.]
(Bot.)

Defn: A genus of minute unicellular algæ of the desmids. These algæ
have a rounded shape and are armed with glochidiate or branched
aculei. Several species occur in ditches, and others are found fossil
in flint or hornstone.


XANTHIN
Xan"thin, n. [Gr. xanqo`s yellow.]

1. (Physiol. Chem.) A crystalline nitrogenous body closely related to
both uric acid and hypoxanthin, present in muscle tissue, and
occasionally found in the urine and in some urinary calculi. It is
also present in guano. So called from the yellow color of certain of
its salts (nitrates).

2. (Chem.) A yellow insoluble coloring matter extracted from yellow
flowers; specifically, the coloring matter of madder.  [Formerly
written also xanthein.]

3. (Chem.) One of the gaseous or volatile decomposition products of
the xanthates, and probably identical with carbon disulphide.  [Obs.]


XANTHINE; XANTHIN
Xan"thine, n. Also Xan"thin . [Gr. xanqo`s yellow.] (Physiol. Chem.)

Defn: A white microcrystalline nitrogenous compound, C5H4O2N4,
present in muscle tissue, in the liver, spleen, pancreas, and other
organs, and also in urine (in small quantities) and some urinary
calculi, and in the juices of certain plants; -- so called because it
leaves a yellow residue when evaporated to dryness with nitric acid.
Xanthine is closely related to uric acid.


XANTHININE
Xan"thi*nine, n. [Gr. xanqo`s yellow + quinine.] (Chem.)

Defn: A complex nitrogenous substance related to urea and uric acid,
produced as a white powder; -- so called because it forms yellow
salts, and because its solution forms a blue fluorescence like
quinine.


XANTHIUM
Xan"thi*um, n. [NL., fr. Gr. xa`nqion a plant used for dyeing the
hair yellow, said to be the Xanthium strumarium, from xanqo`s
yellow.] (Bot.)

Defn: A genus of composite plants in which the scales of the
involucre are united so as to form a kind of bur; cocklebur; clotbur.


XANTHO-
Xan"tho-.

Defn: A combining form from Gr. xanqo`s yellow; as in xanthocobaltic
salts. Used also adjectively in chemistry.


XANTHOCARPOUS
Xan`tho*car"pous, a. [Xantho-+ Gr. karpo`s fruit.] (Bot.)

Defn: Having yellow fruit.


XANTHOCHROI
Xan*thoch"ro*i, n. pl. [NL.  See Xanthochroic.] (Ethnol.)

Defn: A division of the Caucasian races, comprising the lighter-
colored members.

The Xanthochroi, or fair whites, . . . are the prevalent inhabitants
of Northern Europe, and the type may be traced into North Africa, and
eastward as far as Hindostan.
Tylor.


XANTHOCHROIC
Xan`tho*chro"ic, a. [Xantho-+ Gr. chro`a color.] (Ethnol.)

Defn: Having a yellowish or fair complexion; of or pertaining to the
Xanthochroi.


XANTHOCHROID
Xan"tho*chroid, a. [See under Xanthrochroic, -oid.] (Ethnol.)

Defn: Having a yellowish or fair complexion. -- n.

Defn: A person having xanthochroid traits.


XANTHOCHROISM
Xan*thoch"ro*ism, n.

Defn: Abnormal coloration of feathers in which yellow replaces the
normal color, as in certain parrots. It is commonly due to lack of
the dark pigment which with yellow forms green.


XANTHODONTOUS
Xan`tho*don"tous, a. [Xantho-+ Gr. 'odoy`s, 'odo`ntos, tooth.]

Defn: Having yellow teeth.


XANTHOGEN
Xan"tho*gen, n. [Xantho- + -gen.] (Chem.)
 (a) The hypothetical radical supposed to be characteristic of
xanthic acid. [Archaic]
 (b) Persulphocyanogen.  [R.]


XANTHOGENATE
Xan"tho*gen*ate, n. (Chem.)

Defn: A salt of xanthic acid.


XANTHOGENIC
Xan`tho*gen"ic, a. [See Xantho-, and -gen.] (Chem.)

Defn: Producing a yellow color or compound; xanthic.  See Xanthic
acid, under Xanthic.


XANTHOMA
Xan*tho"ma, n. [NL.  See Xantho-, and -oma.] (Med.)

Defn: A skin disease marked by the development or irregular yellowish
patches upon the skin, especially upon the eyelids; -- called also
xanthelasma.


XANTHOMATOUS
Xan*thom"a*tous, a. (Med.)

Defn: Of or pertaining to xanthoma.


XANTHOMELANOUS
Xan`tho*mel"a*nous, a. [Pref. xantho- + Gr. , , black.] (Ethnol.)

Defn: Of or pertaining to the lighter division of the Melanochroi, or
those races having an olive or yellow complexion and black hair.


XANTHOPHANE
Xan"tho*phane, n. [Xantho- + Gr. fai`nein to show.] (Physiol.)

Defn: The yellow pigment present in the inner segments of the retina
in animals.  See Chromophane.


XANTHOPHYLL
Xan"tho*phyll, n. [Xantho- + Gr. fy`llon leaf.] (Bot.)

Defn: A yellow coloring matter found in yellow autumn leaves, and
also produced artificially from chlorophyll; -- formerly called also
phylloxanthin.


XANTHOPOUS
Xan"tho*pous, a. [Xantho- + Gr. poy`s, podo`s, foot.] (Bot.)

Defn: Having a yellow stipe, or stem.


XANTHOPROTEIC
Xan`tho*pro*te"ic, a. (Physiol. Chem.)

Defn: Pertaining to, or derived from, xanthoprotein; showing the
characters of xanthoprotein; as, xanthoproteic acid; the
xanthoproteic reaction for albumin.


XANTHOPROTEIN
Xan`tho*pro"te*in, n. [Xantho-+ protein.] (Physiol. Chem.)

Defn: A yellow acid substance formed by the action of hot nitric acid
on albuminous or proteid matter. It is changed to a deep orange-
yellow color by the addition of ammonia.


XANTHOPUCCINE
Xan`tho*puc"cine, n. [Xantho-+ puccoon + -ine.] (Chem.)

Defn: One of three alkaloids found in the root of the yellow puccoon
(Hydrastis Canadensis). It is a yellow crystalline substance, and
resembles berberine.


XANTHORHAMNIN
Xan`tho*rham"nin, n. [Xantho-+ NL. Rhamnus, the generic name of the
plant bearing Persian berries.] (Chem.)

Defn: A glucoside extracted from Persian berries as a yellow
crystalline powder, used as a dyestuff.


XANTHORHIZA
Xan`tho*rhi"za, n. [NL., fr. Gr. xanqo`s yellow + "ri`za root.]
(Bot.)

Defn: A genus of shrubby ranunculaceous plants of North America,
including only the species Xanthorhiza apiifolia, which has roots of
a deep yellow color; yellowroot. The bark is intensely bitter, and is
sometimes used as a tonic.


XANTHORHOEA
Xan`tho*rhoe"a, n. Etym: [NL., from Gr. xanqo`s yellow + (Bot.)

Defn: A genus of endogenous plants, native to Australia, having a
thick, sometimes arborescent, stem, and long grasslike leaves. See
Grass tree.


XANTHOSE
Xan"those, n. (Chem.)

Defn: An orange-yellow substance found in pigment spots of certain
crabs.


XANTHOSIS
Xan*tho"sis, n. Etym: [NL., fr. Gr. xanqo`s yellow.] (Med.)

Defn: The yellow discoloration often observed in cancerous tumors.


XANTHOSPERMOUS
Xan`tho*sper"mous, a. Etym: [Xantho- + Gr. (Bot.)

Defn: Having yellow seeds.


XANTHOUS
Xan"thous, a. Etym: [Gr.

Defn: Yellow; specifically (Ethnol.), of or pertaining to those races
of man which have yellowish, red, auburn, or brown hair.


XANTHOXYLENE
Xan*thox"y*lene, n. Etym: [See Xanthoxylum.] (Chem.)

Defn: A liquid hydrocarbon of the terpene series extracted from the
seeds of a Japanese prickly ash (Xanthoxylum pipertium) as an
aromatic oil.


XANTHOXYLUM
Xan*thox"y*lum, n. Etym: [NL., from Gr. xanqo`s yellow + xy`lon
wood.] (Bot.)

Defn: A genus of prickly shrubs or small trees, the bark and rots of
which are of a deep yellow color; prickly ash.

Note: The commonest species in the Northern United States is
Xanthoxylum Americanum. See Prickly ash, under Prickly.


XEBEC
Xe"bec, n. Etym: [Sp. jabegue, formerly spelt xabeque, or Pg. xabeco;
both from Turk. sumbeki a kind of Asiatic ship; cf. Per. sumbuk, Ar.
sumb a small ship.] (Naut.)

Defn: A small three-masted vessel, with projecting bow stern and
convex decks, used in the Mediterranean for transporting merchandise,
etc. It carries large square sails, or both. Xebecs were formerly
armed and used by corsairs.


XEME
Xeme (zem), n. (Zoöl.)

Defn: An Arctic fork-tailed gull (Xema Sabinii).


XENELASIA
Xen`e*la"si*a, n. Etym: [NL., from Gr. (Gr. Antiq.)

Defn: A Spartan institution which prohibited strangers from residing
in Sparta without permission, its object probably being to preserve
the national simplicity of manners.


XENIUM
Xe"ni*um, n.; pl. Xenia. Etym: [L., from Gr. (Class. Antiq.)

Defn: A present given to a guest or stranger, or to a foreign
ambassador.


XENODOCHIUM
Xen`o*do*chi"um, n. Etym: [LL., fr. L. xenodochium a building for the
reception of strangers, Gr. (a) (Class. Antiq.)

Defn: A house for the reception of strangers.
(b) In the Middle Ages, a room in a monastery for the reception and
entertainment of strangers and pilgrims, and for the relief of
paupers. [Called also Xenodocheion.]


XENODOCHY
Xe*nod"o*chy, n. Etym: [Gr.

Defn: Reception of strangers; hospitality. [R.]


XENOGAMY
Xe*nog"a*my, n. Etym: [Gr. xe`nos strange, foreign + (Bot.)

Defn: Cross fertilization.


XENOGENESIS
Xen`o*gen"e*sis, n. Etym: [Gr. xe`nos a stranger + E. genesis.]
(Biol.)
(a) Same as Heterogenesis.
(b) The fancied production of an organism of one kind by an organism
of another. Huxley.


XENOGENETIC
Xen`o*ge*net"ic, a. (Biol.)

Defn: Of or pertaining to xenogenesis; as, the xenogenetic origin of
microzymes. Huxley.


XENOMANIA
Xen`o*ma"ni*a, n. Etym: [Gr. xe`nos strange + E. mania.]

Defn: A mania for, or an inordinate attachment to, foreign customs,
institutions, manners, fashions, etc. [R.] Saintsbury.


XENOMI
Xen"o*mi, n. pl. Etym: [NL., from Gr. xe`nos strange.] (Zoöl.)

Defn: A suborder of soft-rayed fresh-water fishes of which the
blackfish of Alaska (Dallia pectoralis) is the type.


XENON
Xen"on, n. [Gr. , neut. of  strange.] (Chem.)

Defn: A very heavy, inert gaseous element occurring in the atmosphere
in the proportion of one volume is about 20 millions. It was
discovered by Ramsay and Travers in 1898. It can be condensed to a
liquid boiling at -109º C., and to a solid which volatilizes without
melting. Symbol Xe or X; atomic weight 130.2.


XENOPTERYGII
Xe*nop`te*ryg"i*i, n. pl. Etym: [NL., from Gr. xe`nos strange +
(Zoöl.)

Defn: A suborder of fishes including Gobiesox and allied genera.
These fishes have soft-rayed fins, and a ventral sucker supported in
front by the pectoral fins. They are destitute of scales.


XENOTIME
Xen"o*time, n. Etym: [Gr. xe`nos guest, stranger + xenotim.] (Min.)

Defn: A native phosphate of yttrium occurring in yellowish-brown
tetragonal crystals.


XENURINE
Xe*nu"rine, n. Etym: [Gr. xe`nos strange + (Zoöl.)

Defn: A cabassou.


XENYL
Xen"yl, n. Etym: [Gr. xe`nos strange + -yl.] (Chem.)

Defn: The radical characteristic of xenylic compounds.


XENYLIC
Xe*nyl"ic, a. (Chem.)

Defn: Pertaining to, derived from, designating, certain amido
compounds obtained by reducing certain nitro derivatives of diphenyl.


XERAPHIM
Xer"a*phim, n. Etym: [Pg. xarafin, xerafin, fr. Ar. ashrafi noble,
the name of a gold coin.]

Defn: An old money of account in Bombay, equal to three fifths of a
rupee.


XERES
Xer"es, n.

Defn: Sherry. See Sherry.


XERIF
Xer"if, n.

Defn: A shereef.


XERIFF
Xer"iff, n. Etym: [See Shereef.]

Defn: A gold coin formerly current in Egypt and Turkey, of the value
of about 9s. 6d., or about $2.30; -- also, in Morocco, a ducat.


XERODERMA
Xe`ro*der"ma, n. Etym: [NL., fr. Gr. (Med.)
(a) Ichthyosis.
(b) A skin disease characterized by the presence of numerous small
pigmented spots resembling freckles, with which are subsequently
mingled spots of atrophied skin.


XERONATE
Xe"ro*nate, n. (Chem.)

Defn: A salt of xeronic acid.


XERONIC
Xe*ron"ic, a. Etym: [Gr. conic.] (Chem.)

Defn: Pertaining to, or designating, an acid, C8H12O4, related to
fumaric acid, and obtained from citraconic acid as an oily substance
having a bittersweet taste; -- so called from its tendency to form
its anhydride.


XEROPHAGY
Xe*roph"a*gy, n. Etym: [L. xerophagia, Gr.

Defn: Among the primitive Christians, the living on a diet of dry
food in Lent and on other fasts.


XEROPHILOUS
Xe*roph"i*lous, a. Etym: [Gr. (Bot.)

Defn: Drought-loving; able withstand the absence or lack of moisture.
Plants which are peculiarly adapted to dry climates are termed by De
Candolle xerophilous. Goodale.


XEROPHTHALMIA
Xe`roph*thal"mi*a, n. Etym: [L., fr. Gr. Ophthalmia.] (Med.)

Defn: An abnormal dryness of the eyeball produced usually by long-
continued inflammation and subsequent atrophy of the conjunctiva.


XEROPHTHALMY
Xe`roph*thal"my, n. (Med.)

Defn: Xerophthalmia.


XIPHIAS
Xiph"i*as, n. Etym: [L., a swordfish, a sword-shaped comet, fr. Gr.

1. (Zoöl.)

Defn: A genus of fishes comprising the common swordfish.

2. (Anat.)
(a) The constellation Dorado.
(b) A comet shaped like a sword


XIPHIDIUM
Xi*phid"i*um, n. Etym: [NL., from Gr. xi`fos sword.] (Bot.)

Defn: A genus of plants of the order Hæmodraceæ, having two-ranked,
sword-shaped leaves.


XIPHIOID
Xiph"i*oid, a. Etym: [Xiphius + -oid.] (Zoöl.)

Defn: Of, pertaining to, or resembling, a cetacean of the genus
Xiphius or family Xiphiidæ.


XIPHIPLASTRON
Xiph"i*plas"tron, n.; pl. Xiphiplastra. Etym: [NL., fr. Gr. xi`fos a
sword + plastron.] (Anat.)

Defn: The posterior, or fourth, lateral plate in the plastron of
turtles; -- called also xiphisternum.


XIPHISTERNUM
Xiph"i*ster"num, n.; pl. Xiphisterna. Etym: [NL., fr. Gr. xi`fos a
sword + sternum.] (Anat.)
(a) The posterior segment, or extremity, of the sternum; -- sometimes
called metasternum, ensiform cartilage, ensiform process, or xiphoid
process.
(b) The xiphiplastron.
 -- Xiph"i*ster"nal a.


XIPHIUS
Xiph"i*us, n. Etym: [NL., fr. Gr. xi`fos a sword.] (Zoöl.)

Defn: A genus of cetaceans having a long, pointed, bony beak, usually
two tusklike teeth in the lower jaw, but no teeth in the upper jaw.


XIPHODON
Xiph"o*don, n. Etym: [Gr. xi`fos a sword + (Paleon.)

Defn: An extinct genus of artiodactylous mammals found in the
European Tertiary formations. It had slender legs, didactylous feet,
and small canine teeth.


XIPHOID
Xiph"oid, a. Etym: [Gr. xi`fos a sword + xiphoide.] (Anat.)
(a) Like a sword; ensiform.
(b) Of or pertaining to the xiphoid process; xiphoidian.


XIPHOIDIAN
Xiph*oid"i*an, a. (Anat.)

Defn: Xiphoid.


XIPHOPHYLLOUS
Xi*phoph"yl*lous, a. Etym: [Gr. xi`fos sword + (Bot.)

Defn: Having sword-shaped leaves.


XIPHOSURA
Xiph`o*su"ra, n. pl.

Defn: See Xiphura.


XIPHURA
Xi*phu"ra, n. pl. Etym: [NL., from Gr. xi`fos sword + (Zoöl.)

Defn: Same as Limuloidea. Called also Xiphosura. X ray. See under
Ray.


XP
XP. [Belongs here in appearance only.]

Defn: The first two letters of the Greek word XRISTOS, Christ; -- an
abbreviation used with the letters separate or, oftener, in a
monogram, often inclosed in a circle, as a symbol or emblem of
Christ. It use as an emblem was introduced by Constantine the Great,
whence it is known as the Constantinian symbol, or monogram. See
Labarum.


X RAYS; X-RAYS
X rays, or X"-rays`, n. pl.

Defn: The Röntgen rays; -- so called by their discoverer because of
their enigmatical character.


X-RAY TUBE
X"-ray" tube. (Physics)

Defn: A vacuum tube suitable for producing Röntgen rays.


XYLAMIDE
Xy*lam"ide, n. Etym: [Xylic + amide.] (Chem.)

Defn: An acid amide derivative of xylic acid, obtained as a white
crystalline substance.


XYLAN
Xy"lan, n. (Chem.)

Defn: A gummy substance of the pentosan class, present in woody
tissue, and yielding xylose on hydrolysis; wood gum.


XYLANTHRAX
Xy*lan"thrax, n. Etym: [Gr. xy`lon wood +

Defn: Wood coal, or charcoal; -- so called in distinction from
mineral coal.


XYLATE
Xy"late, n. (Chem.)

Defn: A salt of xylic acid.


XYLEM
Xy"lem, n. Etym: [Gr. xy`lon wood.] (Bot.)

Defn: That portion of a fibrovascular bundle which has developed, or
will develop, into wood cells; -- distinguished from phloëm.


XYLENE
Xy"lene, n. Etym: [Gr. xy`lon wood.] (Chem.)

Defn: Any of a group of three metameric hydrocarbons of the aromatic
series, found in coal and wood tar, and so named because found in
crude wood spirit. They are colorless, oily, inflammable liquids,
C6H4.(CH3)2, being dimethyl benzenes, and are called respectively
orthoxylene, metaxylene, and paraxylene. Called also xylol.

Note: Each of these xylenes is the nucleus and prototype of a
distinct series of compounds.


XYLENOL
Xy"le*nol, n. Etym: [Xylene + -ol.] (Chem.)

Defn: Any one of six metameric phenol derivatives of xylene, obtained
as crystalline substances, (CH3)2.C6H3.OH.


XYLETIC
Xy*let"ic, a. (Chem.)

Defn: Pertaining to, or designating, a complex acid related to
mesitylenic acid, obtained as a white crystalline substance by the
action of sodium and carbon dioxide on crude xylenol.


XYLIC
Xy"lic, a. (Chem.)

Defn: Pertaining to, derived from, or related to, xylene;
specifically, designating any one of several metameric acids produced
by the partial oxidation of mesitylene and pseudo-cumene.


XYLIDIC
Xy*lid"ic, a. (Chem.)

Defn: Pertaining to, or designating, either one of two distinct acids
which are derived from xylic acid and related compounds, and are
metameric with uvitic acid.


XYLIDINE
Xy"li*dine, n. (Chem.)

Defn: Any one of six metameric hydrocarbons, (CH3)2.C6H3.NH2,
resembling aniline, and related to xylene. They are liquids, or
easily fusible crystalline substances, of which three are derived
from metaxylene, two from orthoxylene, and one from paraxylene. They
are called the amido xylenes.

Note: The xylidine of commerce, used in making certain dyes, consists
chiefly of the derivatives of paraxylene and metaxylene.


XYLINDEIN
Xy*lin"de*in, n. (Chem.)

Defn: A green or blue pigment produced by Peziza in certain kinds of
decayed wood, as the beech, oak, birch, etc., and extracted as an
amorphous powder resembling indigo.


XYLITE
Xy"lite, n. Etym: [Gr. xy`lon wood.] (Chem.)

Defn: A liquid hydrocarbon found in crude wood spirits.


XYLITONE
Xy"li*tone, n. (Chem.)

Defn: A yellow oil having a geraniumlike odor, produced as a side
product in making phorone; -- called also xylite oil.


XYLO-
Xy"lo-.

Defn: A combining form from Gr. xy`lon wood; as in xylogen,
xylograph.


XYLOBALSAMUM
Xy`lo*bal"sa*mum, n. Etym: [NL., fr. Gr. xy`lon wood + xylobalsamum
balsam wood, Gr. (Med.)

Defn: The dried twigs of a Syrian tree (Balsamodendron Gileadense).
U. S. Disp.


XYLOCARPOUS
Xy`lo*car"pous, a. Etym: [Xylo- + Gr. (Bot.)

Defn: Bearing fruit which becomes hard or woody.


XYLOCOPA
Xy*loc"o*pa, n. Etym: [NL., fr. Gr. xy`lon wood + (Zoöl.)

Defn: A genus of hymenopterous insects including the carpenter. See
Carpenter bee, under Carpenter.
 -- Xy*loc"o*pine, a.


XYLOGEN
Xy"lo*gen, n. Etym: [Xylo- + -gen.]
(a) (Bot.) Nascent wood; wood cells in a forming state.
(b) Lignin.


XYLOGRAPH
Xy"lo*graph, n. Etym: [Xylo- + -graph.]

Defn: An engraving on wood, or the impression from such an engraving;
a print by xylography.


XYLOGRAPHER
Xy*log"ra*pher, n.

Defn: One who practices xylography.


XYLOGRAPHIC; XYLOGRAPHICAL
Xy`lo*graph"ic, Xy`lo*graph"ic*al, a. Etym: [Cf. F. xylographique.]

Defn: Of or pertaining to xylography, or wood engraving.


XYLOGRAPHY
Xy*log"ra*phy, n. Etym: [Xylo- + -graphy: cf. F. xylographie.]

1. The art of engraving on wood.

2. The art of making prints from the natural grain of wood. Knight.

3. A method pf printing in colors upon wood for purposes of house
decoration. Ure.


XYLOID
Xy"loid, a. Etym: [Xylo- + -oid.]

Defn: Resembling wood; having the nature of wood.


XYLOIDIN
Xy*loid"in, n. Etym: [Xylo- + -oid.] (Chem.)

Defn: A substance resembling pyroxylin, obtained by the action of
nitric acid on starch; -- called also nitramidin.


XYLOL
Xy"lol, n. Etym: [Xylo- + L. oleum oil.] (Chem.)

Defn: Same as Xylene.


XYLOLOGY
Xy*lol"o*gy, n. [Pref. xylo-+ -logy.]

Defn: The branch of dendrology treating of the gross and minute
structure of wood.


XYLONITE
Xy"lon*ite, n.

Defn: See Zylonite.


XYLOPHAGA
Xy*loph"a*ga, n. Etym: [NL. See Xylophagous.] (Zoöl.)

Defn: A genus of marine bivalves which bore holes in wood. They are
allied to Pholas.


XYLOPHAGAN
Xy*loph"a*gan, n. Etym: [See Xylophagous.] (Zoöl.)
(a) One of a tribe of beetles whose larvæ bore or live in wood.
(b) Any species of Xylophaga.
(c) Any one of the Xylophagides.


XYLOPHAGIDES
Xy`lo*phag"i*des, n. pl. Etym: [See Xylophagous.] (Zoöl.)

Defn: A tribe or family of dipterous flies whose larvæ live in
decayed wood. Some of the tropical species are very large.


XYLOPHAGOUS
Xy*loph"a*gous, a. Etym: [Gr. xy`lon wood + (Zoöl.)
(a) Eating, boring in, or destroying, wood; -- said especially of
certain insect larvæ, crustaceans, and mollusks.
(b) Of or pertaining to the genus Xylophaga.


XYLOPHILAN
Xy*loph"i*lan, n. Etym: [See Xylophilous.] (Zoöl.)

Defn: One of a tribe of beetles (Xylophili) whose larvæ live on
decayed wood.


XYLOPHILOUS
Xy*loph"i*lous, a. Etym: [Xylo- + Gr. filei^n to love.] (Zoöl.)

Defn: Of or pertaining to the xylophilans.


XYLOPHONE
Xy"lo*phone, n. Etym: [Xylo- + Gr. fwnh` sound.]

1. (Mus.)

Defn: An instrument common among the Russians, Poles, and Tartars,
consisting of a series of strips of wood or glass graduated in length
to the musical scale, resting on belts of straw, and struck with two
small hammers. Called in Germany strohfiedel, or straw fiddle.

2. An instrument to determine the vibrative properties of different
kinds of wood. Knight.


XYLOPLASTIC
Xy`lo*plas"tic, a. Etym: [Xylo- + -plastic.] (Technol.)

Defn: Formed of wood pulp by molds; relating to casts made of wood
pulp in molds.


XYLOPYROGRAPHY
Xy`lo*py*rog"ra*phy. n. Etym: [Xylo- + Gr. -graphy.]

Defn: The art or practice of burning pictures on wood with a hot
iron; -- called also poker painting. See Poker picture, under Poker.


XYLOQUINONE
Xy`lo*qui"none, n. Etym: [Xylene + quinone.] (Chem.)

Defn: Any one of a group of quinone compounds obtained respectively
by the oxidation of certain xylidine compounds. In general they are
yellow crystalline substances.


XYLORCIN
Xy*lor"cin, n. Etym: [Xylene + orcin.] (Chem.)

Defn: A derivative of xylene obtained as a white crystalline
substance which on exposure in the air becomes red; -- called also
betaorcin.


XYLOSE
Xy"lose, n. [Pref. xylo- + -ose.] (Chem.)

Defn: An unfermentable sugar of the pentose class, C5H10O5, formed by
the hydrolysis of xylan; wood sugar.


XYLOSTEIN
Xy*los"te*in, n. Etym: [Xylo- + Gr. (Chem.)

Defn: A glucoside found in the poisonous berries of a species of
honeysuckle (Lonicera xylosteum), and extracted as a bitter, white,
crystalline substance.


XYLOTILE
Xy"lo*tile, n.

Defn: Same as Parkesine.


XYLOTOMIST
Xy*lot"o*mist, n.

Defn: One versed or engaged in xylotomy.


XYLOTOMOUS
Xy*lot"o*mous, a. [Pref. xylo-+ root of Gr.  to cut.] (Zoöl.)

Defn: Capable of boring or cutting wood; -- said of many insects.


XYLOTOMY
Xy*lot"o*my, n. [Pref. xylo-+ -tomy.]

Defn: Art of preparing sections (transverse, tangential, or radial)
of wood, esp. by means of a microtome, for microscopic examination.


XYLOTRYA
Xy*lo"try*a, n. Etym: [NL., fr. Gr. xy`lon wood + (Zoöl.)

Defn: A genus of marine bivalves closely allied to Teredo, and
equally destructive to timber. One species (Xylotrya fimbriata) is
very common on the Atlantic coast of the United States.


XYLYL
Xy"lyl, n. Etym: [Xylo- + -yl.] (Chem.)

Defn: Any one of three metameric radicals which are characteristic
respectively of the three xylenes.


XYLYLENE
Xy"lyl*ene, n. (Chem.)

Defn: Any one of three metameric radicals, CH2.C6H4.CH2, derived
respectively from the three xylenes. Often used adjectively; as,
xylylene alcohol.


XYRIDACEOUS
Xyr`i*da"ceous, a. (Bot.)

Defn: Of or pertaining to a natural order (Xyrideæ) of endogenous
plants, of which Xyris is the type.


XYRIS
Xy"ris, n. Etym: [L., a kind of Iris, Gr. (Bot.)

Defn: A genus of endogenous herbs with grassy leaves and small yellow
flowers in short, scaly-bracted spikes; yellow-eyed grass. There are
about seventeen species in the Atlantic United States.


XYST; XYSTUS
Xyst, Xys"tus, n. Etym: [L. xystus, Gr. (Anc. Arch.)

Defn: A long and open portico, for athletic exercises, as wrestling,
running, etc., for use in winter or in stormy weather.


XYSTARCH
Xyst"arch, n. Etym: [L. xystarches, Gr. (Gr. Antiq.)

Defn: An office Dr. W. Smith.


XYSTER
Xys"ter, n. Etym: [NL., fr. Gr. (Surg.)

Defn: An instrument for scraping bone.
